---
layout: article
---

TODO - article with symbol character names.

`ABC` - abstract base class. ABCs have at least 1 unimplemented virtual function and can not be instantiated. Some languages offer `abstract` keyword to force a class being abstract without the need to declare any unimplemented function.

[`Boost`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boost_(C%2B%2B_libraries)) - a collection of over 80 high-quality C++ libraries for various purposes. Many have been incorporated into C++ standard, with also many proposed for inclusion in future standards. Boost is sometimes referred to as "the second standard". Most Boost libraries are header-only.

`build` (as a noun) - a ready to use (compiled and linked) program made from source code with certain configuration.

`CMake` - meta build tool, commonly used by various C and C++ projects to generate project files and makefiles. Some IDEs utilize CMake as their build tool.

`CRTP` - curiously recurring template pattern allowing a unique form of static polymorphism. Explained in relevant TTT chapter.

`Cygwin` - a virtual environment layer allowing to run POSIX compliant progams on Microsoft Windows. Able to run programs using UNIX interfaces.

`Doxygen` - documentation generation tool supporting multiple programming languages. Generates static web pages from comments in the source code.

`errno` - thread-local, global variable holding last C error number. Very rarely used in C++. [Error numbers list](http://www.virtsync.com/c-error-codes-include-errno). Note: only 3 values are defined by the C standard, rest is implementation defined but consistent across all POSIX compliant systems.

`GC` - garbage collector. A side process cleanup mechanism used in many higher-level languages which do not use RAII. GC simplifies resource management but imposes a performance loss.

`GCC` - originally "GNU C Compiler", now "GNU Compilers Collecion". The de facto standard compiler toolchain for most GNU/Linux distributions.

`final` - keyword, (depending on the context) preventing a class to be inherited from or preventing a function to be overriden in descendant classes.

`framework` - a prepared set of tools and code base for certain purpose. Differs from library that it requires a certain application structure and can not be customized beyond creator's intent. Frameworks are more popular in higher level languages while libraries in lower level ones, although both are widely used in various languages.

`IDE` - integrated development environment. Usually an advanced code editor with autocomplete and rich refactor features integrated with build system, compiler and debugger.

`interface` - a type (class) that has no member variables and constants and only pure (unimplemented) virtual functions. There is no special notion of interfaces in C++ because there are no restrictions on members and inheritance.

`LEWG`, `LWG` - library (evolution) working groups. Parts of the [C++ Committee](https://isocpp.org/std/the-committee).

`ld` - the GNU linker. Part of GCC toolchain.

`linker` - a program used to link compiled source code files into an executable or a shared/static library. Linkers can merge code from different programming languages and embed additional info.

[`LLVM`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LLVM) - low level virtual machine. An open-source project for building compilers and related tools. Backend of the Clang compiler.

`makefile` - a file with incrementl build directives used by GNU make command line program. Various IDEs and other tools create makefiles and then call make which calls compiler and linker with appropriate arguments. Makefiles can also be used for other incremental command build tasks, for example LaTeX document generation.

`MinGW` - Minimalist GNU for Windows, the most commonly used GCC toolchain port for Windows. Builds native Windows 32 and 64 bit executables.

`MI` - multiple inheritance.

`MSVC` - Microsoft Visual C/C++ compiler.

`MSYS2` (minimal system) - package manager for GNU toolchains for Windows. [Used by Qt](https://wiki.qt.io/MSYS2).

`nullptr`, `NULL`, (in other languages `null` or `nil`) - the lack of object, a null (empty, invalid) memory address. On x86 equivalent to <pre>0x00000000</pre>. Using (dereferencing) a null pointer is undefined behaviour in lower level languages and an exception in higher level ones.

`OSS` - open source software.

`PGO` - profile guided optimization. Optimizations performed on the base of data generated by performance profiling.

`pimpl` - pointer to implementation (sort of design pattern). Explained in relevant chapter

`pointer` - a variable that does not store ordinary data, but holds the address of another variable. Pointers to pointers are possible.

`POSIX` - portable operating system interface. A standarized C interface to create and maintain compability between operating systems. The only largerly used OS which is not POSIX compliant is Windows.

`RAII` - resource aquisition is initialization idiom. Objects dynamically allocating resources are responsible for their cleanup (done by implementing custom destructors). Idiom requires types to implement precise resource ownership models allowing move semantics and compile-time cleanup decisions. RAII is the backbone of C++ and Rust resource management. Term sometimes referred as SBRM - scope based resource management.

`reference` - an alias to a variable or constant. Does not offer all possibilities of pointers, but it safer and easier to optimize. (In C++) references to references do not exist (C++ implements reference collapsing). References must always be initialized and always point to valid object. In higher level languages references can be null but still don't offer pointer arithmetics.

`RVO` (or `NRVO`) - (named) return value optimization. In C++ function returning local temporaries by value are optimized out or to at least move operations. This allows to return any big object from the function without any unnecessary copies.

`segfault` - [Segmentation Fault]((https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Segmentation_fault)). Error caused by dereferencing an invalid poitner (not necessarily a null pointer) or violating virtual memory access.

`SFINAE` - substitution failure is not an error. Template instantiation mechanism used to disable certain implementations based on the type or value properties. Explained in relevant TTT chapter.

`SIGSEGV` - [Signal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signal_(IPC)) thown to the program after encountering segentation fault or similar error.

[`singleton`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singleton_pattern) - A type that is supposed to be only instantiated once. Often regarded as an anti-pattern.

`smart pointer` - a pointer that <del>is smart</del> automatically manages underlying resource (not necessarily memory). Standard library offers classes for unique ownership model (`std::unique_ptr`) and shared ownership model (`std::shared_ptr`, `std::weak_ptr`). Additional and legacy smart pointers are offered by Boost. [SO question](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/106508/what-is-a-smart-pointer-and-when-should-i-use-one).

`std` - the standard library namespace. Every identifier except macros is inside this namespace.

`STL` - standard template library. More than 95% of standard C++ library. Templates are found in various headers - this term is simply covering them all.

`strict aliasing` - an assumption that pointers to unrelated types (not sharing same inheritance tree) can never point to the same object. All variants of `char` and `void` pointers are excluded from this rule. Strict aliasing allows multiple optimizations and is very highly encouraged by the C++ standard. Enabled by default in all major compilers.

`this` - a pointer to the object itself, available in any non-static member function. Necessary in some contexts. `this` (if available) is never null.

`toolchain` - a set of tools (programs, scripts) used to build a project. The typical minimal toolchain would invole a text editor, compiler and debugger. Bigger projects additionally use documentation tools, static analyzers, continuous integration tools and more.

`Qt` (cute) - The biggest C++ GUI framework and set of GUI-related libraries, also probably the only one having WYSIWYG UI editor.

`Qt Creator` - IDE from Qt company. Has integrated support for Qt libraries.

`vtable` - [virtual method table](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_method_table). In typical runtime dispatch implementation, each class that has at least 1 virtual function has embedded vtable pointer as it's first member.
