---
layout: article
---

Programs manipulate and create objects. In most simple scenario these are numbers, but more generic abstractions are also possible (for example classes).

Objects can be stored in various places:
- processor registers
- processor stack
- processor cache (L1, L2, L3)
- main random access memory (RAM)

You don't have to worry about where to put things - compilers are generally much better at dedicing which place will be the best for the given data. Only the type of the data is required to be specified - it defines how much memory is needed and how it will be used.

However, there is a distinction between statically allocated memory and dynamically allocated memory - the second one allows runtime allocations but requires communication with the operating system. Dynamic memory is everything that is explicitly allocated in RAM. Everything else is statically allocated by the compiler and will reside in various parts of the processor. For now, all programs will purely use statically allocated memory which do not requires any additional instructions - everything is done automatically.

#### Question: Does it means the programs will not use any RAM?

Obviously the operating system will need to use some RAM to run the program, but the program itself will never ask for more and use only parts of the processor.

## declarations, scoping and lifetime

**Each statically-allocated variable has well-defined lifetime.** There is a certain time period on which it's life spans. Prior to this, the variable does not exist and after this, it has been destroyed (it's memory has been reused for different purpose or given back to the operating system) and is no longer accessible.

The place at which variable lives is the **scope** of the variable.

```
// error: there is no "x"
x = 4;

{
    // error: there is no "x"
    x = 3;

    // create x with initial value 10
    int x = 10;

    {
        int y = 100;
    } // y dies at this line

    // x is still acessible
    x = 5;
}

// error: there is no "x"
x = 6;
```

The scope (lifetime) of a variable is simply the span of it's block at which it's defined.

Example program - any of the commented lines produces an error because it tries to use `x` before or after it's lifetime.

```c++
#include <iostream>
 
int main()
{
    // x = 5;
    {
        // x = 7;

        int x = 10;

        {
            int y = 20;
        }
        // y = 10;

        x = 6;

        std::cout << "x = " << x;
    }

    // std::cout << "x = " << x;
    std::cin.get();
    return 0;
}
```

### exercise

Check errors generated by your compiler by uncommenting invalid lines. It will help you in case you later encounter similar problems.
